Welcome, everyone,
to a series of talks that I'm doing here
with my friend Chris Bache,
and we're going to be discussing a subject
that we're both really interested
in and fascinated by,
which is rebirth and all the things
that go along with rebirth.
Might also call it reincarnation,
because that's part of the story.
And this began, really,
because I read a book by Chris,
a wonderful book called 'LSD
and the Mind of the Universe'.
And
what it did is it kind of just
triggered a real recognition in me.
And since I'm a teacher of spiritual
matters and I'm the founder
of a system called the Gene Keys,
that resonance that went off in me,
it caused me to reach out via
email to this amazing man.
And you never know whether you're
going to hear back in those instances.
And Chris very kindly got back to me
and we started a series of dialogues
and discussions, and we realised that we
really enjoyed having dialogues together.
So that's why we're here.
And we're going to explore this
subject in several sessions.
So, today, we're going to just begin
with some introductory concepts and basics
and then see where it leaves us.
So I hope you enjoy it and I'm
very much looking forward to it.
And we're anticipating three discussions.
Absolutely.
So Chris, if you want to say a few things
about yourself, just so that
people know who you are.
It's a pleasure to meet here.
And I've enjoyed our conversations
that we've had prior to this.
And this present dialogue grew out
of those earlier conversations.
I am a professor of philosophy
and religious studies.
I'm on the religious
studies side of the shop.
I'm retired from Youngstown
State University.
In the course of my teaching,
I've taught courses on world religions
and Eastern religions,
transpersonal psychology of religion
and comparative mysticism, Buddhism.
So I've been teaching in areas touching
on reincarnation for many years.
I have written several books.
My first one was on reincarnation,
starting with the scientific evidence
for reincarnation, which
we'll be touching on today.
And it's been seminal in my thinking.
And I just believe that reincarnation is
one of those concepts that is
like plate tectonics.
If you-- at first it's hard to see because
it's not obvious, but, once you
see it, it changes everything.
It changes so much, it opens
up the horizon of existence.
So we thought this would be a good topic
to have a shared conversation about
and I'm just real pleased to be here.
Great.
Thanks, Chris.
And I mean,
we'll put the link in afterwards,
but there's some great things,
talks that you've done,
and particularly one which I watched
fairly recently about 'Is there evidence
for reincarnation?'
And it's so illuminating
and extraordinary, and kind
of overlooked by so many people.
Tell us some of
the, you know, your story in assembling
and amassing that, some of that evidence,
or meeting other people that have.
Well, you know, I came from a traditional
religious background,
but over the course of many years
of graduate education I finished
my doctoral work in philosophy religion,
as an atheistically inclined agnostic.
Basically I'd studied my way
out of religion altogether.
So I started my academic career as a young
man, a long time ago in 1978,
and I met there the work of two people,
in my first year, and both of them
changed the course of my life.
The first was Ian Stevenson,
the Carlson Professor at the University
of Virginia, whose lifelong work has been
to provide carefully documented cases
that clearly-- of young children,
small children who have spontaneous
memories of their previous life.
And then researching these children
from all over the world,
collecting thousands of cases,
publishing hundreds of cases.
And he convinced me that reincarnation
was a simple fact of life.
That's quite a book, isn't it?
That's a big book he's written.
The book.
He's written about, oh,
I think close to a dozen now, but this
first one was called '20
Cases Suggestive of Reincarnation'.
And, to me, it was a life pivot,
because reincarnation was never
discussed in my graduate education.
It was never discussed in the West
religions, or in the scientific tradition
that had kind of wiped the slate clean
for-- of the religious traditions.
So I just erased my blackboard and began
to rethink again the larger questions
of life incorporating reincarnation.
The second person I met at that time was
Stanislav Grof,
who is the foremost authority
on integrating psychedelics
into psychotherapy.
And he was providing a methodology
that actually allows one to explore
the deeper dimensions
of one's own consciousness.
So that began a whole 'nother journey,
a second journey which culminated
eventually in the publication of this book
Richard mentioned,
'LSD in the Mind of the Universe'.
But today the focus here is
on Ian Stevenson's - what he started
in the revolution
of really providing carefully documented
evidence that reincarnation is
just simply a fact of life.
It's not a religious thing.
It's not a-- it's simply a natural
phenomenon that's happening in the world.
And in your talk you gave,
again which the link will be here--
as a wonderful,
you know, years spent as an academic,
you kind of argue both sides.
So you show how different people have come
in and even written books to refute those
things, but how they've fallen short.
And so there's this whole story around it.
And there's this growing body of evidence,
that maybe in the last 50 years has been
documented, I mean it's
fairly recent, isn't it?
It is recent.
50 years ago, we didn't
have this evidence.
It was still-- reincarnation was
a speculative topic that the theologians
argued back and forth on.
But now it's moved from the theologians'
table to the psychologists' table.
And now, as we explore more deeply,
the deeper levels of consciousness
in the depth-psychology tradition,
we just find we're bumping into th
ese events over and over again.
Now, the western philosophical tradition,
of course, is kind of still saturated
with the metaphysical position of
naturalism, which says, 'The only thing
which is real is that which is physical.'
So, therefore, the brain
produces your mind.
So obviously, in that system,
once your brain dies, your mind 'psss'
[makes sound effect] ceases to exist.
So it's impossible for there to be
something like reincarnation,
because it implies a dimension of reality
that's behind the physical world.
If you exist there for any-- consciousness
can exist there for any interval of time
, between the death of one personality
and the birth of a second personality.
So, naturally, there's been a real push
back from philosophical
traditions in the West.
Mostly they've just ignored the evidence.
They don't look at it,
and even those who look at it and engage
it, the foremost critic that I mentioned
in my talk was a man named Paul Edwards,
a substantial American philosopher,
even in his work - the evidence really
a careful, dispassionate analysis
of the debate between Ian Stevenson
on the one hand,
and Paul Edwards on the other hand,
is that he just refuses to look seriously
at the evidence, because he's convinced
beforehand that the evidence must
be somehow faulty, because we know
that reincarnation can't happen.
Yeah, of course, and that's often the way
with academics sometimes, isn't it?
And, you know, a great-- you know, so
that's, like, that's really
interesting in itself, just the evidence.
And I don't think we need to kind of go
any more into that now but it's--
I guess
what are the implications, you know,
if we do-- Because this year I've done
a series of videos myself, short ones,
just exploring the implications of 'What
if I say yes to this concept,
and I explore it?' You know,
if I open my mind and my heart to it,
and I begin to really
deeply explore it. You know,
the implications to our world view,
and the way we
move through life is huge, isn't it?
Yeah.
It all hinges on time.
How much time we have. Because if you
have a sense of-- well, let me back up.
I'm a professor.
So if I give a quiz in class, I can expect
a certain quality of an answer back.
If I give an exam that takes an hour,
I expect a higher quality of response.
And if it's a take-home research paper, I
have higher expectations, still,
because they have more time.
So, philosophically, if we believe we only
live on Earth one time,
and we only have in some cases a few
minutes, to as many as 100 years,
and we extrapolate from that - if there is
a purpose to existence,
that purpose must be proportionate
to the amount of time we
have to fulfil that purpose.
But if we have a hundred lifetimes,
a thousand lifetimes, in
which to actualise the purpose
of the universe, then I think it expands
exponentially our potential assessment of
what the purpose of existence might be.
And that's why it's such an important
philosophical discussion,
because once you understand the dynamics
of reincarnation,
once you grasp the fundamental principle,
then it lifts the constriction of time,
and it allows us to begin to think
in terms of,
and appreciate and understand,
the larger patterns of the pulse of cause
and effect overarching
over centuries of time.
And it just elevates the whole discussion.
Absolutely.
And I think, like-- you know, if I can be
blunt, like, if
you have an inherent sense of a divinity
behind creation, then
it seems logical to extend that into,
you know, that this concept of generosity.
Because if you had a divinity and you only
have one life, it's very stingy, it seems.
Like, it doesn't seem to have any
kind of pattern or reason to it.
You know, it's like, for me,
life is just-- spirit is just filled
with generosity in terms of time.
And if we kind of open to the eternal
nature of life,
then of course that would make sense, for
there to be a continuity of consciousness.
And I think that, you know,
the more people open to this,
the more they kind of realise it
has some deep root inside them.
You know, I
discovered that a lot because I've
begun to talk about it more and more.
And one of the things I realised is no one
else really much-- other than people
who are doing past-life regression
therapeutically, a lot of the teachers
and spiritual teachers in the world
today avoid this subject.
I mean, I don't know if they consciously
avoid it, but they don't talk about it.
I mean, they get asked questions,
but then their answers are
kind of generally quite short,
and it doesn't get picked up.
So, yeah, I'm really interested
in something that is passed over that is
so obvious, and it should be
in plain view for all of us.
Isn't that curious? I mean,
I understand why my colleagues
at the University who tended to be
you know materialists and reductionists.
That I understand.
But why spiritual teachers
wouldn't talk about it?
Or wouldn't use it to sort of frame
a larger and expanded horizon? Sometimes
I've heard people say, 'Well,
it can dilute your intensity
of commitments for realisation
in the present.' But, you know,
if you think you have many lifetimes
and you're not going to take
this lifetime as seriously.
But I think that
argument kind of evaporates quickly
once you look at it carefully.
I think it deepens the textures of the
situations in which we find ourselves in.
And let me just give you one example.
Some of the research,
Michael Newton's research, for example,
in his book 'Journeys of the Soul' and
'Destiny of Souls', he and other past life
therapists have found evidence
that we choose our incarnation.
Now, I think in some ways many people
don't, they may kind of go very
haphazardly and take what's available,
but as you get mature,
you choose your incarnation carefully.
Now, if we choose our
incarnation carefully,
when there was a time when we knew more
than we know now, and we could see more
than we could see now,
if we chose the life that we're living
now, with all of its ups and downs
and challenges and opportunities,
then doesn't that change how we might
relate to those very circumstances
in which we find ourselves?
You know, not to go chasing
all sorts of hidden
mission-- you know, hidden meanings,
but to basically temper the quality
of the self-responsibility that we use
in how we engage the people that we're
with, the circumstances
that we find ourselves in.
Yeah.
And doesn't it make you also-- I mean,
for me, it makes me feel more like
a kind of eternal, cosmic adventurer.
So, you know, it enrichens
this time I'm in now.
It actually, in
many ways it focuses me a lot more
into the present, because I'm not worrying
about dying, if you know what I mean.
It changes that.
And it's not just a concept.
You know, have to go-- you know, this is
my understanding, through my teaching,
is you have to contemplate something very
deeply like this, for it to start
to kind of take root in you.
And then as it takes root in you,
it brings out of your-- literally,
I feel the truth of it is in our DNA.
It's, like, in us.
So once that gets triggered,
that kind of awakening of the memory,
it-- there's a sort of certainty
and a stability that grows inside us,
that enables us to handle
whatever challenges come to us in a really
much more powerful way,
because we're rooted in this kind
of eternal acceptance of this.
You know, you hear
it all the time, on people on the radio. I
heard last week, like, someone just
saying, 'Well, you've only got one life.
So you've got to, you know, really make
the most of it.' Which is a great thing to
say, but it's also, you
have only got one life.
It's just, I
keep coming back to, that's really a tight
kind of reality from whichever belief
system you're operating out of.
Cuts the legs right out from under you.
Because correlating with that is usually
the ideas of: you exist and the universe
is being driven by blind chance,
it's just random mutation, there's no
existential significance
to the circumstances in which you find
yourself in, so you only get one shot,
make the best of it,
but then when you die, it's gone,
you're gone anyway, so who cares?
And that's just such a demeaning
and counterintuitive
philosophy of life. Because I think when
we look at the beauties of nature,
when we look at the night sky,
when we see the pictures from the Hubble
telescope of the magnificent patterns
in the deep cosmos, when we look around us
at Earth and look at the depth
of the emergence of life and the emergence
of self-awareness on the planet over time,
all these projects take place
over enormous sweeps of time.
And we are the first generation to really
appreciate how much time the universe has
had to be evolving
into the form that it is.
Now, if the universe and everything it's
doing takes enormous amounts of time
and we only have one life,
then existentially, we're cut off.
We're not-- we don't participate
in that massive project.
But if we do part-- if we live multiple
lifetimes, there's a good
news - bad news situation.
You know, the bad news is, you know, well,
it's hard work in this lifetime, and we'd
like to have it over with when we die.
But if we keep coming back, you know,
there's a larger project afoot.
You know, it's not a simple grade,
like we thought it was before.
It's a whole university education.
The good news is you're right.
It drops away, the fear
of death drops away.
I mean, it just drops away.
The good news is it allows us to envision
a deeper-- to feel into the deeper
currents of life and the deeper projects.
And it allows us to begin to think
in terms of longer term projects.
And I think this is one of the things you
see when people take to heart this idea,
even without specific knowledge
of their former lives.
I mean, that's interesting.
And that can be helpful.
But even without that,
when you really let that in, and you look
around you and you realise that every
person you're seeing has been here before
and will be here again, it just allows
you to engage life with so much more
meaning and intensity of the process.
You know,
what we are good at are things we have
practised in the past,
things that we are just getting started
on are things will get
better at in the future.
And we can think we have that much time.
We can think in terms
of that larger landscape.
Yeah and of course,
you know, we're not-- you know, there are
many great thinkers and philosophers
and sages who have come to the same
conclusion about rebirth. And
notably among them in the West,
because we can talk a little
bit about the Eastern views.
It's pretty common in the East.
But Jung is someone who obviously springs,
like, straight up into the centre
fray, because he's a bit
more contemporary.
And,
you know, he's been this pillar of modern
psychology, in the way in which we now
understand the unconscious, and
the collective unconscious, and mythology,
and all these other transformational
kind of consciousness views.
But he tended to hide his
belief in reincarnation.
You know, he came to it kind of late
in life, and he began to hide it because
he had pushed the boundaries so much
he was concerned about the backlash.
But it's there in his work.
And I think that's what
happens with a lot of people.
I think they go 'Well,
I'm not sure I want to go into that area'
because it's got a stigma attached to it.
And it really has, hasn't it? Because
the moment you say the word reincarnation,
you've got like a-- there's a whole kind
of battery of sceptics coming at you.
Whether they're coming from Christianity
or whether they're coming from, you know,
materialist science.
You know, it's like you really put your
head above the parapet.
For years, for decades,
I was taking students into the
literature on reincarnation.
And it's like you just-- once you put all
that aside and you just look at the cases,
you just look the evidence.
I mean, I found 95 percent of my students
were able to overcome all kinds
of resistances, both secular and religious
resistance, because they're trained
in our culture to follow the evidence.
Once they saw the evidence and how
consistent it was, and how it appeared
in so many contexts,
spontaneous memories, evoked memories.
Theyjust-- they accepted it.
Once they accepted it, it was a life
-changing event in many of their lives.
Do you have any favourite stories that you
remember of those recurrences,
because it's not--
I have so many.
The one I opened the book with 'Life
Cycles', the one I start in the opening
pages, is a case of a young
girl named Romy Crees.
And Romy was born
to Catholic parents in Iowa.
So it's like, it's okay if they
want to reincarnate in India.
That's their business.
But everybody knows Iowan Catholics
do not reincarnate.
But she had spontaneous memories of having
been a man, Joe Williams,
in a previous life.
She remembers being married.
She remembers three children,
having three children, their names.
She remembered dying in a motorcycle
accident, and she had
a phobia of motorcycles.
And long story short, researchers got
to her eventually and brought her
to the town where she had remembered
living as Joe Williams.
And she was able to remember--
identify the mother of Joe Williams.
She insisted that they pick up blue
flowers on the way to the house because
she said, Those are the flowers that she
likes, and that turned out to be true.
She was able to identify from pictures
who the people were in Joe Williams's
life, the players of their life.
And she developed a deep emotional bond
to Williams's mother, who was alive.
And his wife named Sheila.
He had been married.
She had been married to-- Joe
had been married to Sheila.
They were--did have three children.
Sheila and Joe were killed
in a motorcycle accident.
So this has-- goes on, and on, and
on. I've read hundreds of these cases.
And there's so many of them, yeah.
So many. These children remember very
intimate details of family history.
They remember-- they know the architecture
inside homes that they've never been in.
They can walk around a town that they've
never been in and they
know their way around.
They remember the personalities
from the previous person's life.
And they remember arguments
that they had with neighbours,
incidents that came up in-- Like the time
a child, when they were having a birthday
party for their child - that a neighbour's
dog bit one of the children in the party.
Very, very-- things that are
-- just don't make the public news.
Little details.
It's the little details, isn't it?
There's one I've read that I loved.
I can't remember exactly.
But I remember a reincarnated
memory of-- in a Muslim family.
And they took the little girl, I think it
was a little girl, into the family.
And the women were the veiled,
completely veiled.
And she identified from looking at them,
from seeing their body language,
without seeing their faces or
anything, she could name them.
And that was like, wow,
that's how deep this kind of detail goes.
Yeah.
Yeah it's fun to explore those things.
And I-- you know,
I recommend to people that you just take
a look at some of the evidence,
because it's very-- I find it very
affirming. You know, sort of like, it's
difficult to refute that level of detail.
And I don't know, you can come up with--
I'm sure a good cynic can
come up with all kinds of--
Well, here's one for the cynics.
This is one of Ian Stevenson's cases.
They brought this boy back into the life
circumstances of the previous personality.
And the wife of the previous personality
said, 'Okay, if you're my husband,
where did you put the will? After you
died, we looked all over for the will.
We couldn't find it.' The little boy walks
over to a floorboard in the kitchen,
picks up a board,
reaches down and underneath
the floor and pulls up the will.
Isn't that something?
How many of those cases do you read before
you begin to understand,
this is just happening.
It's just part of the rhythm of life.
Totally.
It is extraordinary.
And also it has-- there's a whole load
of documentation about marks on the body,
isn't there? You know people
that have marks on the body
that relate to previous events.
Or you know-- I don't think we need to go
down that route, but it's another whole
area of documentation.
That was Ian Stevenson's last work.
And if you do want to go down that area,
you can read his
two volume, thousand page book
on reincarnation and biology,
which he studies 187 cases
with medical documentation.
Really rigorous, isn't it?
Rigorous, very, very rigorous.
And what we find is that the death wounds,
the wounds associated with death
in the previous personality show up as
birthmarks or scars
in the subsequent personality.
But this is suggesting not only do our
-- does our mind influence subsequent
mind, but even our body,
our mind's experience in the body can
influence the formation of tissue
in our subsequent body. And that of
course just deepens the story.
Absolutely.
And that's why I wanted to bring it up,
because that's what leads
into the therapeutic work, doesn't it?
Because, if you open to this idea then--
I mean I'm just thinking of all the people
out there who have difficulties,
maybe in their health,
or maybe in their relationships,
or maybe addictions,
or you know whatever we're facing in life,
or just things that they've-- complexes
that they find really hard to overcome.
And if we understand that those things may
have a root in a previous lifetime
and that was something unfinished or
incomplete, then it can open up
a whole therapeutic journey for us.
And that's what this whole therapeutic
community has evolved, out of this.
The past life therapy community,
basically, there are any number
of therapists who've said something
to the effect of this:
If you put someone into a relaxed,
inward-focused state,
a hypnotic state but people have a lot
of misunderstandings of what hypnosis--
but just relaxed inward-focused state,
and you invite them to go to the source
of the problem that your-- they've come
to therapy to address,
about 35-40 percent of them will go back
to something in their present life. It'll
come back to something that happened
in their childhood or
something in their infancy.
But a significant 50-60 percent of people
will go back to something that's
rooted in a previous lifetime.
And when they
consciously remember that previous
lifetime, and they consciously
re-appropriate the trauma that they
weren't able to fully internalise
and address in that lifetime,
particularly death could-- circumstances
surrounding their death,
when they are able to consciously remember
and assimilate it into their present
consciousness, then
consistently, over and over again,
underlying psychological problems and even
physical problems begin to loosen
their grip on us and untie the knots.
So [inaudible] a greater depth.
Because they have these roots deep in the
collective unconscious, you know, and
we're going into the collective
unconscious to find them
and pull them out. So that's--
Well,
let's be a little careful here because
collective unconscious,
in a Jungian kind of usage refers
to the unconscious of the entire species.
So let's maybe call a soul consciousness,
which is the collective unconscious
of the individual through time.
I got a good question for you, which is,
I have a really dear friend, and he is a
kind of startling intellect. He's in his
late seventies now and really,
really intelligent, very spiritual man.
And yet he has a difficulty
with reincarnation.
And we have wonderful discussions around
it, in the past, and his
kind of-- his very sophisticated spiritual
intellect, you know,
where it goes is-- and I think others may
come from this direction as well,
that's why I'm saying it, is that,
you know, you really
want, you know, you want to believe it.
Everyone wants to believe
in the continuity of our existence.
And yet
the great Advaita teachers or whatever,
they would talk about the surrender
of the individual ego
into the higher-- you know into the-- back
into the ocean of being.
And that's something that you have
to undergo in order to attain liberation.
And so
there is this very strong spiritual kind
of-- I think we've referred
to it as 'up and out'
kind of cosmology,
where you know there-- we are here
to escape this, this cycle,
this samsaric cycle. And
that-- you know, so that we
can attain this liberation.
And we attain it within this lifetime,
in a body, or we may attain it,
you know, afterwards.
So that's another whole
kind of interesting area there, isn't it?
Yeah, simply because there are cultures
who have believed in reincarnation
for thousands of years, and have developed
a certain understanding of it in their
culture, doesn't mean
that they've got it right.
And I think that reincarnation is one
of those ideas that
simply, once we begin to see the evidence,
then it begins to deepen a line of enquiry.
Which I-- for me personally,
I think is-- I've revised dramatically
the understanding I had of reincarnation
borrowed from Eastern traditions,
Eastern cultures.
And one of the traditions has to do
with this larger question:
Where does reincarnation go?
Where is it taking us?
What's the endgame of reincarnation?
And you're right.
All the cultures,
all the religions of the Axial age - it
came into existence three to 5000 years
ago - all of them teach of a cosmological
journey that's an up-and-out cosmology.
So there is a sense
that we're trapped here.
This is not as good as spiritual reality.
We want to develop either in one lifetime,
if it's a Christian salvation,
salvation by grace,
you know, or multiple lifetimes to achieve
samsara-- excuse me, acheive moksha.
Which is escape from samsara,
escape from the physical world.
We achieve some type of enlightenment
condition, which is the passport that
allows us to leave and not come back.
And all of these traditions are
basically about escape.
And that leaves unanswered the fundamental
question - what is the purpose
of physical existence in the first place?
And now that we have a deeper
understanding of how many billions
of years of genius have gone
into the manifestation of the physical
world - it's not a very satisfactory
conclusion to think that just within
five-- we only became conscious of these
deeper dimensions about 5000 years ago.
As soon as we become self-conscious
of the level of consciousness which we
share with all other
beings and all existence.
As soon as we become aware of that and can
live our life from that centre,
then the purpose of existence is
to escape the entire physical world?
And I don't think that's really true.
And it's a little bit rooted in
that kind of slightly self-denial
philosophy, isn't it? That, you know,
that also is many thousands of years old.
Yeah.
I think that basically all the Axial
religions got two things
fundamentally wrong.
They've got many things right,
but they got two things wrong.
They got nature wrong.
They don't really have an adequate
theology or understanding of nature.
And they got women wrong.
And the two are connected because
women are closely connected to nature.
And they're patriarchally-oriented
and they're escapist-oriented.
And I think it makes-- as
an historian, I understand it.
I think about four or 5000 years ago,
through various psycho-technologies:
either yoga, or meditation,
or psychedelic substances,
we began to have a deeper experience
of the mother universe, of this universe
that surrounds the physical universe.
Once you have experiential contact
with that universe, it is so blissful, it
is so ecstatic-soaked that you cannot
help-- and you recognise
that that's where we're from.
You cannot help believe
that that's where we belong.
This is not where we belong,
that's where we belong.
And they develop a theology of return.
So the Saviour comes to take us home.
The enlightened being comes
to liberate us back into our home.
But that still leaves the question,
what is the purpose of creation?
And I think what we're beginning
to understand now,
as our experience of this mother universe
is deepened over time,
and our understanding of the physical
universe has deepened over time,
is that we're not here to achieve
escape velocity and leave.
We're here to incarnate more, and more,
and more of spiritual reality and capacity
inside our physical being, so that we can
truly live and create heaven
on Earth, to wake up and stay.
And not just to wake up as an individual,
but to wake up as an entire
species and stay.
Now that-- you can't leave that.
I mean we're going to discuss
that more aren't we.
We're going to come back to that, yeah.
But that's a huge
window to open up.
It's this-- you know, and you've
touched on a lot of themes there,
particularly,
you know, the thing about the feminine,
the physical body.
You know, that's what I think I interpret
partly what you're saying as well is
that those religions didn't really
understand the physical body,
as you said, nature.
Didn't value it.
Because there's vast beauty
in this physicality.
And it's perhaps-- what we're exploring
is perhaps it's here to be spiritualised.
Perhaps it's here--
you know perhaps that's why we're here,
to bring that ecstatic realisation,
deeper, and deeper, and
deeper into the form.
Because, you know, if we see that that's
our highest purpose,
we no longer want to leave.
That's-- then our role is,
through subsequent incarnations,
to bring more and more
of that light down into the Earth.
And then we're also taking full
responsibility for the body and the Earth.
You know which is something
we also haven't done very well.
Yeah, absolutely.
And if that first-- sounds at first
disappointing, where we would say, 'Oh,
no, I want heaven, please.
Thank you very much.
I don't want, you know, a
transformed body here. Because here is
still too difficult.' I think
we may be underestimating
how--
but we may be underestimating what is
possible. And just what it would really
feel like to live a truly fully
-spiritualised, enlightened existence.
And here I think we can look at some
of the God-soaked masters of history.
Who are truly living in the
God-soaked condition, or the,
you know, a primordial condition
that is radically open to the vast mind
of the universe, inside their body,
inside time and space.
And what we're seeing from these
Mahasiddhas, these great beings, is that
they can do what we would call miracles.
Because there is so much spiritual power
concentrated in their presence,
that the-- it is as if the laws of
nature operate differently around them.
And they're showing us a prototype of what
each of us is in the process of becoming.
And, therefore, if we imagine what it
would be like to have an entire species
kind of living in that kind
of presence then, what a planet!
Yeah and our physics is also pushing
us in that direction, isn't it?
To the understandings that we are
entangled with nature, with the universe.
And that-- and my old teachings is
based on this notion that in our DNA are
contained these sleeping, dormant codes,
these Siddhis, as I call them, 64
Siddhis. And like you were you're
talking about,
they're an activation inside us that
is waiting for its moment so that we can
enter more fully into the next phase
of our evolution, of the magical
universe, the quantum universe.
You know, where our thoughts and our
feelings and our sensations are actually
travelling kind of outside
our physical body.
You know, they're entangled with nature.
So nature then responds with us, to us,
which perhaps it already does
at a level that we're not aware of.
So it's just about opening up those
pathways, you know, those literal pathways
in our being, into that next
phase of our evolution.
We are already plugged into nature, very,
very deep levels down to the quantum level
in the unified field. We're plugged
into our ecosystems and the subtle,
intimate feedback. We're plugged into each
other, our minds wash back and forth.
We're already there.
But when we can become conscious of those
connections, when we can
sort of lift off the obstructive shadows
that are carry-overs from other,
sadder times,
then that connection becomes
-- begins to rise, and it empowers
a conscious participation.
And it makes what was
unconscious, conscious.
And then existence becomes more enlivened,
I think, and enlivened
with the synchronicities
that sort of indicate the broader
intelligence that's a-- you know,
that's alive in life around us.
Yeah.
Yeah I'm sure that you know-- I'd love it
if we could bring our conversation also
into sort of-- into people's lives
a little bit, so that they can consider
their relationships and-- you know
from this perspective, and how that might
change one's attitudes or views
towards difficult relationships,
or towards, you know, what's
the afflictions that come up in us
and that we have to handle in our everyday
life. It really changes
all of that, doesn't it?
Because then you look at life and it's
actually a process of the opening
of the heart, which the teachers have
always said. It's like every relationship,
it's purpose is to show us some grace.
And I call this, this Law of Unseen Grace.
You know, where every relationship that
shows up is offering us some-- you know
particularly the difficult ones,
is offering us some
incredible teaching, some
virtue that we haven't yet polished.
Whether it's forgiveness, or whether it's
some, you know, clarity,
or whether it's-- you know, whatever it
is, it's just some form of love
that we are here to learn from those
relationships, because they have--
they come as part of our teaching-karma.
You know, I always see it like, the
ancients called it-- this life a Lila.
And I always see these-- a game,
a drama or a theatre.
And, it's almost like, before you come in,
you're given this little envelope,
and in there, you open up the envelope
and in there is like,
'Okay, here's your script
and here are-- ' and there's going
to be some things that show up.
And these are the things you're going
to learn this-- you know, you've
chosen it at some level.
And so that changes the way that we
kind of see it-- behave, doesn't it?
Yeah.
I think so.
I'm sure if you had personal experience
of that in your life, in your
emotional life, I mean that's--
Yeah.
And one little-- one more step.
It's not simply the envelope
that was given you.
But you were given
three envelopes and you chose the one
that you felt was most suited for your
evolution at this particular
point in history.
And so it's your choice
to engage these challenges.
And
yeah-- and when we engage our life
in that way,
it's taking full responsibility
for the circumstances
in which we find ourselves in.
It allows us to engage the challenges
with more patience,
and with more dedication,
and with more of the long term.
Because we know we're not-- if this is
something that if we don't deal with it
now, it's not going to go away.
It's just going to come
back in another form.
So let's get it done now.
Let's deal with it now.
And it also allows you to build on things,
because I think
our understanding of reincarnation is
being very informed by the therapists
working heroically in past-life therapy.
But if you only pay attention to those
cases, it can tend to create
an understanding of reincarnation that is
tilted towards failures
coming forward that we--
Traumas.
Traumas, yeah.
But just like the school system around us
has many faults,
but most of the kids learn and most
of the kids pass every year.
And I think most people rise to the karma,
the challenge of their life.
And that means every lifetime we're not
simply dealing with leftover
issues from the past.
We're building on assets, we're spending
assets, and investing in greater
fruition in the future.
And so it helps us handle
the challenging circumstances.
But it also helps us embrace
the positive circumstances of our life,
the hidden talent which comes forward
unannounced, the partnership which emerges
that we can feel such a deep kinship
with this person, that we can go
forward and do something new with.
Yeah.
And you kind of triggered a memory of mine
about-- from Sri Aurobindo, you know,
who spoke incredibly clearly
with his penetrating mind about
the complexity of karma,
and how we-- you know, because we
probably need to sort of probably discuss
karma a little bit, and how
we misunderstand it so easily
by trying to oversimplify it.
And, actually,
when you look at the universe with all its
multiple dimensions and the quantum field,
and there's these force fields
operating at different levels.
But there's this karmic force that's
equalising and balancing, or
that has a tendency towards balance,
we could say, and it's-- and allowing us
to go through this educational process.
But everything at different levels is
influenced by these strands
of the karmic force.
And that karmic force seems to have-- it's
like the idea I said about unseen grace,
if you are able to fully embrace it
in your life, then you get a grace
through going-- through unwrapping it.
But you've got to kind of have the courage
face it fully, and really take it
in and let it-- you know,
whatever the suffering is,
transform it, transmute it.
So it doesn't-- transmutation of karma
play a huge part in this
reincarnative theology.
If we just look around us.
It's the web of cause and effect.
Everything is cause and effect.
We live in a continuous web of cause
and effect. The air we breathe,
the weather patterns, our biology,
what we ate, the purity of what we ate,
everything is this flow of cause
and effect, the universe, the movement
of the planets, the solar system.
We live in a continuous web of cause
and effect. And
here we're simply focusing on that portion
of the web of cause and effect,
which influences the
human-- the development of the soul,
influences our human psychophysical
development, which is a subset
of this much larger cause and effect.
And, in that context,
I think we've had a tendency, I think, to
narrow our discussion of Karma.
Usually, many of the teachers will talk
about karma, and they're only talking
about that portion of the karma,
which immediately impinges upon our
spiritual maturity. Where they were making
progress, becoming a more
spiritually mature person.
But a lot of karma, probably the bulk of
karma, is just amoral cause and effect.
You have a habit, you practise something,
it becomes a skill, that skill
carries over into another life.
You have an automobile accident,
you develop a trauma of a particular
circumstance, that carries
over into another life.
It's not necessarily
about your spiritual development.
It's just cause and effect.
Yeah, circumstantial.
Yeah.
And so when-- as you open up
to the conditioning,
that's kind of etching itself in your
life, and you lift it out,
engage it, lift it out.
Then that-- the well-spring
of your life becomes freer.
It becomes clearer.
And
you're not stepping out of the web
of cause and effect,
but you're stepping into a greater freedom
within the web-work of cause
and effect that surrounds you.
You have greater capacity to make
increasingly free choices.
Greater capacity to choose.
Ask yourself, 'Well, what do I want?
What would I like to have?'
Instead of a compulsion of,
you know, grabbing.
You know, it's tempting,
isn't it? For some people to kind of say,
'Well, karma and reincarnation,' then
there's this sort of like, 'Well,
that person over there was born disabled.
Does that mean they've done something
terrible in their last life?' And there's
that whole
real sort of oversimplification--
Over, yeah.
Of a very complex kind of arena where
-- you know, we don't-- unless you can
plug right into the soul-quality
inside that person, inside that being,
you don't really know
what-- you know, they could be that hidden
Saint that has deliberately taken
on that incredibly challenging role,
to polish one particular virtue,
you know, or skill,
over the period of one lifetime.
And equally I guess, like,
very short incarnations.
That's-- I don't think you and I talked
about those, but I'd love to hear what you
-- you know, like a child that comes
in for a very short time and then leaves.
That also has implications for
the healing of the whole, doesn't it?
Because why does a child come
in for a short time,
or a baby is born very-- for a very short
period of time and then
there's-- leaves this grief behind it.
But then there's this feeling that it's
also still part of your life.
Yeah.
Let's explore that, I mean we haven't-- we
can go and--
We haven't talked about that, yeah.
You know it's a-- we can recognise
the principle of cause and effect.
We can recognise the principle
of karma-vipaka, cause and effect.
But then we can get-- so many
teachers I think sometimes get
-- or all of us, we think we
can determine cause and effect.
We think we can understand it when really
we're just touching the wrapping
on the package.
We're just really touching the surface,
and the safest position I think really is
recognise that we're looking
at a deep, deep mystery here.
And you're-- it would be foolish to try
to judge anybody's karma that's
just a-- that's a wasted exercise.
Better to stick with the karma that you
can penetrate within your own life.
And you're right, because we don't know,
we really don't know what's happening when
we see cause and effect
operating around us.
When you-- I would tell my students,
when you see great suffering,
you're either seeing a sinner or a Saint.
And you can never know which it is,
so best not to make any judgments at all.
And I think there are many hidden Saints,
many more hidden Saints who are
taking on a lot of cause and effect,
either from their own larger soul stream,
or from even a collective soul stream.
So they're actually focusing in their
body, in their psyche,
what we might call negative karma,
negative cause and effect,
for the uplift of the whole.
And that type of generosity
and compassion, we see it around us all
the time in good parents,
and good mothers, and good fathers.
They would be-- do anything
for their children.
And I think souls
at that deeper level do that too.
So we can't judge.
We really just
couldn't judge, it's a waste of effort.
No. I read this book.
I think I told you about this book, and
anyone-- it's a recommendation called
'Sand Talk', and it's by
an Aboriginal from Australia, or part
-Aboriginal, and really intelligent man.
And he tells the story of when he went
to talk to one of the elders about,
you know, the problems of, you know, the
indigenous people,
particularly the men who had kind of
just got-- gone down the role
of alcoholic, the way of alcoholism.
And were eating really terrible food, and,
like, were overweight and obese,
and these terrible problems.
And he was, like, really concerned about
them, and the old elder just said,
'Yeah, they're the warriors.
You know, they are taking on the karmic,
you know they are warrior spirits in our
tribe, in our lineage. And they're holding
this kind of negativity in their bodies.
And one day they will
become-- they will move
from warrior to healer.
And that's the path.
That's the kind of evolutionary pathway.'
But it was a beautiful,
it really, like, it really
stuck with this young man as he was
exploring like, 'Wow,' that's a really
kind of powerful, empowering
way to see someone
dealing with, like, a cultural problem.
You know or a societal,
you know, difficulty
that's more collective,
you know, that we see a lot.
You know, collective
karma is a-- you know, we're touching on here as well.
Yeah, it's a very, very deep-- those deep
currents that run underneath,
that requires us to open to a much deeper,
expanded spiritual story. And
because we often think of reincarnation
and karma in a very individualistic,
atomistic fashion where we're-- you know,
the individual soul is evolving themselves
over the skilful use of choice
in the context of karma.
And if we start to sink into a larger
understanding, a deeper understanding,
then we recognise that each individual
is a fractal point within a unified field.
And that there's a-- these deep currents
that are running within
the unconscious of humanity, or the
soul-field of humanity,
and that we are all players
on a larger evolutionary dynamic.
Then it just opens up a deeper
understanding of what's taking place here.
And I know that we've sort of tagged this
for one of our topics for our
second discussion, but it's-- yeah.
Well we'll plant the seed now.
When you go into that kind of world view,
the perfection of the choreography of what
you're explaining is just
mind blowing, isn't it?
It's mind blowing in terms
of the interconnectivity of soul groups,
and these fractals,
and these patternings of humans.
And
this is why one of the great insights
that I got from your
uni-- 'Mind of the Universe' book,
because you describe this really well.
It's a paradox, I think.
And maybe it's one of the last things we
can just discuss here today because it's
so important, I find, and it's the paradox
of being an individual soul and yet
being everything at the same time.
So how does that paradox-- how
do we-- how does that hold up?
You described it beautifully
in your book as, I think you said,
'the
soul was
open on all sides'.
I think that was the expression you used,
which I really liked, open on all sides.
It's so, like, part of the ocean
and yet still a focalised drop.
'Time and awareness', also, you named it.
Yeah it seems common-sensical that you
can't be both apart
and the whole at the same time.
Those are mutual, exclusive categories.
And even, you know, great spiritual
teachers - the Vedantic tradition
in Hinduism and other spiritual systems
have said, 'The goal of life
is to abandon your individuality
- dissolve that and allow yourself to be
absorbed into the totality
and know the bliss of absorption.'
So that means all the individual
capacity which we are developing over all
these incarnations in this
view ends in extinction.
And it's kind of wasted.
And I think it's wasted.
And I think that's-- it's
an inadequate world view.
And what has emerged in my spiritual path
and in my psychedelic path is a very
different kind of world view,
that I think we share.
And that is
that we are moving into higher and higher,
more sophisticated forms of individuality.
That individuality is one
of the great gift of creation.
It's something that the divine
wants to encourage in its creation.
And-- but at early stages of individuality,
we experience our individuality cut off
from the larger texture of surrounds.
So it's us against them,
or us and the whole.
But when individuality
matures into a richer expression,
into what I would call the birth
of the diamond soul,
then there is both a sense of being
a specific defined individuality emerging
out of the specific historical lineage.
And yet at the same time, profoundly open
to the larger patterns of existence,
open to each other and compassionate
heart, open to other human beings
with whom we have such deep
histories with, and open
to-- in a sense that the intelligence
of the universe, open to the
perceptions and the influence
of ideas that flow into us.
And this communion with the universe.
Which-- and I actually believe
that you have to have developed a very,
very strong individuality to withstand
the intensity of the communion that's
available to us when we enter into
communion with the one, with the whole.
It is as if, if
we didn't-- if we weren't really,
really diamond hard and focused and clear,
when we encountered the love
of the universe for us,
it would just shatter us.
We have to be strong in order to actually
participate in the deeper
levels of communion.
And I think you know that-- that's such
an empowering vision, so empowering.
And it's also
a-- you know, I think it opens this
question of our notion of enlightenment,
our notion of divinity,
we have to kind of go on expanding
that, because it's just
a notion that we've inherited.
And even though it's been useful to get us
to where we are,
we have to just go on expanding it.
And, for me, what
is kind of missing more in the current,
you know, modalities is creativity.
That whole idea of it coming to an end
and then going out into the wonderful
absorption of the whole, you know,
by maintaining the individuality
at the same time, what you are maintaining
is creativity, creativity itself.
Because then you are like a shard
of the divine creative essence.
And it's like you said in your book,
'Go out and create my children.'
You know, and if there were
a divinity, let's just say,
and it wanted to have children,
then the thing it would want for its
children is to be free, right?
And to go out and create,
and to become gods within God.
That's the vision I hold, that we become
creator gods within the wider God.
Yes. Lovely expression!
You know, small 'g' in a big 'G'.
Gods within God,
yeah. The creative spark
within the fire of creation.
Yes.
I agree with that.
I share that.
And it changes everything.
It changes how we greet the children
who are born into our families, because
we know that they're not coming from us.
They're coming to us.
It changes how we see old people and how
we see little people,
because young people are not necessarily
young in terms of their soul-age.
Old people are not necessarily
old in terms of their soul-age.
It just opens up a much larger tapestry,
and it gives us
permission to recognise the deep
aspirations that we have towards
greatness, towards great creativity,
towards the great love,
towards great spiritual fulfilment.
Things that we may or may not finish
and get through in this lifetime.
But we can move toward them.
It's much more, in some respect,
sophisticated spirituality,
isn't it? It's more nuanced.
It requires a subtler
kind of understanding intellectually - I
would say intellectually but through a
subtler intelligence to understand it.
It's not this sort of, you know,
here's a law of karma.
It governs everything.
You know, bang!
It's not that simple.
It's like Aurobindo says,
'There are layers and layers
of understanding and subtlety and nuance.'
It's like a-- I'm a lover of tea,
you know, fine tea.
And when you find something like that,
and you can be anything, you can be
a chess player, and you find the subtlest
nuances in the thing you're
really understanding.
The layers, and layers, and layers
as you become more attuned to it.
And I think that's what we are.
We are becoming more, and more tuned, the
more evolved that individual soul-essence
becomes. Then
the more subtle we can-- the more we can
understand, you know, these nuances.
And then we're kind of-- I don't know
-- that we're really inspired
by the-- empowered, as well,
by the creative current.
I mean,
maybe we can leave this to the next one,
but people always talk about past lives.
And my part of my teaching is like,
I'm interested in future-lives as well.
And because when you expand your sense
of time broadly enough, you know, really,
like, really don't hold back anything.
You don't need to just look backwards.
You can also remember forwards, because
there's this feeling of memory
has to go back.
But memory, also, for me,
is like, it travels forwards.
And that's what we call revelation.
So revelations can come backwards and
forwards through time into this essence.
And this essence can be hugely expanded
by those revelations,
and more focused than ever
in the present, you know,
in the beauty of the present moment.
So, yeah, I think that's
the thought I'd like to end on.
But
is there any, like-- do you
want to close this off?
That's a really good thought
and a good spot to end on.
To me, the principle of accumulation is
one of the fundamental principles I bring
to understanding what's happening
in creation,
that the universe is accumulating.
It's learning.
It's a self-learning system.
And so we are constantly learning.
We can't help but learn.
Even if we do a mediocre job in our
lifetime, we're still
learning in that lifetime.
And if we do a better job, we're learning.
And as we learn, we activate.
In one sense, I think we are learning
to be geniuses in every area of life.
A genius at chess,
a genius at relationships, a genius
in all the different areas of life.
And it's as if each lifetime is a petal
in a flower, the soul is the flower.
And their-- if you just--
I meditate sometimes on a flower
and imagine each hundred-year-lifetime is
a pistil, and a stamen,
and a petal in this magnificent flower.
And that's, you know-- to
be a genius at life,
to really to be completely unfolded, and
taking advantage of the opportunity
that we've been given to grow
and become more than we've been.
And, again,
so many-- even though many cultures have
understood reincarnation, I
don't think they've grasped it fully.
They haven't really seen the
full potential of the concept.
They've really seen it within an early
limitation of it.
And on the future,
we're going to talk about time more,
I know, as we go on, but let me
just leave with the thought
that Robert Monroe, the great out-of-body
researcher and the founder
of the Monroe Institute
of Applied Sciences,
his book 'Far Journeys' / 'Ultimate
Journey', he said he reached a point
in his explorations out-of-body,
where he discovered he realised that you
don't necessarily have to incarnate
in the next century.
That incarnation isn't
necessarily historically linear.
You could have former lives that were
actually lived in future time.
So
that, isn't that-- that just,
like, 'Oh man,' that really--
I'm going to have to unpick
that one a little bit.
Yeah, that really challenges things.
In addition to intuiting
the future which is not yet,
and bringing the not yet into the now,
I wonder sometimes whether some of us have
sampled that future time, and are
inculcating the awareness in the now.
That's what I would call a current
of involution as opposed to evolution.
There is a spiritual force coming down,
and there is
an evolution-- evolving force going up,
if you want to do it up and down,
but, you know, it's like a funnel.
Yeah,
Sri Aurobindo. I love you quoting Sri Aurobindo
because he's one of my heroes
too, and he says all that clearly.
And I agree.
Yeah.
Great.
Well, what a wonderful beginning
Chris. Thank you so much.
Yeah, I look forward to where we go next.
Yeah, me too, yeah.
Take care.
Take care Richard.